README.md, before:

# Tambo Template

This is a starter NextJS app with Tambo hooked up to get your AI app development started quickly.

## Get Started

1. Run `npm create-tambo@latest my-tambo-app` for a new project

2. `npm install`

3. `npx tambo init`

- or rename `example.env.local` to `.env.local` and add your tambo API key you can get for free [here](https://tambo.co/dashboard).

4. Run `npm run dev` and go to `localhost:3000` to use the app!

## Customizing

### Change what components tambo can control

You can see how the `Graph` component is registered with tambo in `src/lib/tambo.ts`:

```tsx
const components: TamboComponent[] = [
  {
    name: "Graph",
    description:
      "A component that renders various types of charts (bar, line, pie) using Recharts. Supports customizable data visualization with labels, datasets, and styling options.",
    component: Graph,
    propsSchema: z.object({
      data: z
        .object({
          type: z
            .enum(["bar", "line", "pie"])
            .describe("Type of graph to render"),
          labels: z.array(z.string()).describe("Labels for the graph"),
          datasets: z
            .array(
              z.object({
                label: z.string().describe("Label for the dataset"),
                data: z
                  .array(z.number())
                  .describe("Data points for the dataset"),
                color: z
                  .string()
                  .optional()
                  .describe("Optional color for the dataset"),
              }),
            )
            .describe("Data for the graph"),
        })
        .describe("Data object containing chart configuration and values"),
      title: z.string().optional().describe("Optional title for the chart"),
      showLegend: z
        .boolean()
        .optional()
        .describe("Whether to show the legend (default: true)"),
      variant: z
        .enum(["default", "solid", "bordered"])
        .optional()
        .describe("Visual style variant of the graph"),
      size: z
        .enum(["default", "sm", "lg"])
        .optional()
        .describe("Size of the graph"),
    }),
  },
  // Add more components for Tambo to control here!
];
```

You can install this graph component into any project with:

```bash
npx tambo add graph
```

The example Graph component demonstrates several key features:

- Different prop types (strings, arrays, enums, nested objects)
- Multiple chart types (bar, line, pie)
- Customizable styling (variants, sizes)
- Optional configurations (title, legend, colors)
- Data visualization capabilities

Update the `components` array with any component(s) you want tambo to be able to use in a response!

You can find more information about the options [here](https://tambo.co/docs/concepts/registering-components)

### Add tools for tambo to use

```tsx
export const tools: TamboTool[] = [
  {
    name: "globalPopulation",
    description:
      "A tool to get global population trends with optional year range filtering",
    tool: getGlobalPopulationTrend,
    toolSchema: z.function().args(
      z
        .object({
          startYear: z.number().optional(),
          endYear: z.number().optional(),
        })
        .optional(),
    ),
  },
];
```

Find more information about tools [here.](https://tambo.co/docs/concepts/tools)

### The Magic of Tambo Requires the TamboProvider

Make sure in the TamboProvider wrapped around your app:

```tsx
...
<TamboProvider
  apiKey={process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_TAMBO_API_KEY!}
  components={components} // Array of components to control
  tools={tools} // Array of tools it can use
>
  {children}
</TamboProvider>
```

In this example we do this in the `Layout.tsx` file, but you can do it anywhere in your app that is a client component.

### Change where component responses are shown

The components used by tambo are shown alongside the message resopnse from tambo within the chat thread, but you can have the result components show wherever you like by accessing the latest thread message's `renderedComponent` field:

```tsx
const { thread } = useTambo();
const latestComponent =
  thread?.messages[thread.messages.length - 1]?.renderedComponent;

return (
  <div>
    {latestComponent && (
      <div className="my-custom-wrapper">{latestComponent}</div>
    )}
  </div>
);
```

For more detailed documentation, visit [Tambo's official docs](https://docs.tambo.co).

Commit message:

Update README for TanStack Router
- Changed references from Next.js to TanStack Router and Vite
- Updated dev server port from 3000 to 5173
- Updated environment variable from NEXT_PUBLIC_ to VITE_ prefix
- Updated provider setup example to reference app/routes structure

README.md, after:

# Tambo Template

This is a starter template built with **TanStack Router** and **Vite** with Tambo hooked up to get your AI app development started quickly.

## Get Started

1. Run `npm create-tambo@latest my-tambo-app` for a new project

2. `npm install`

3. `npx tambo init`

- or rename `example.env.local` to `.env.local` and add your tambo API key you can get for free [here](https://tambo.co/dashboard).

4. Run `npm run dev` and go to `localhost:5173` to use the app!

## Customizing

### Change what components tambo can control

You can see how the `Graph` component is registered with tambo in `src/lib/tambo.ts`:

```tsx
const components: TamboComponent[] = [
  {
    name: "Graph",
    description:
      "A component that renders various types of charts (bar, line, pie) using Recharts. Supports customizable data visualization with labels, datasets, and styling options.",
    component: Graph,
    propsSchema: z.object({
      data: z
        .object({
          type: z
            .enum(["bar", "line", "pie"])
            .describe("Type of graph to render"),
          labels: z.array(z.string()).describe("Labels for the graph"),
          datasets: z
            .array(
              z.object({
                label: z.string().describe("Label for the dataset"),
                data: z
                  .array(z.number())
                  .describe("Data points for the dataset"),
                color: z
                  .string()
                  .optional()
                  .describe("Optional color for the dataset"),
              }),
            )
            .describe("Data for the graph"),
        })
        .describe("Data object containing chart configuration and values"),
      title: z.string().optional().describe("Optional title for the chart"),
      showLegend: z
        .boolean()
        .optional()
        .describe("Whether to show the legend (default: true)"),
      variant: z
        .enum(["default", "solid", "bordered"])
        .optional()
        .describe("Visual style variant of the graph"),
      size: z
        .enum(["default", "sm", "lg"])
        .optional()
        .describe("Size of the graph"),
    }),
  },
  // Add more components for Tambo to control here!
];
```

You can install this graph component into any project with:

```bash
npx tambo add graph
```

The example Graph component demonstrates several key features:

- Different prop types (strings, arrays, enums, nested objects)
- Multiple chart types (bar, line, pie)
- Customizable styling (variants, sizes)
- Optional configurations (title, legend, colors)
- Data visualization capabilities

Update the `components` array with any component(s) you want tambo to be able to use in a response!

You can find more information about the options [here](https://tambo.co/docs/concepts/registering-components)

### Add tools for tambo to use

```tsx
export const tools: TamboTool[] = [
  {
    name: "globalPopulation",
    description:
      "A tool to get global population trends with optional year range filtering",
    tool: getGlobalPopulationTrend,
    toolSchema: z.function().args(
      z
        .object({
          startYear: z.number().optional(),
          endYear: z.number().optional(),
        })
        .optional(),
    ),
  },
];
```

Find more information about tools [here.](https://tambo.co/docs/concepts/tools)

### The Magic of Tambo Requires the TamboProvider

Make sure in the TamboProvider wrapped around your app:

```tsx
...
<TamboProvider
  apiKey={import.meta.env.VITE_TAMBO_API_KEY!}
  components={components} // Array of components to control
  tools={tools} // Array of tools it can use
>
  {children}
</TamboProvider>
```

In this example we do this in the chat route (`app/routes/chat.tsx`), but you can do it anywhere in your app.

### Change where component responses are shown

The components used by tambo are shown alongside the message resopnse from tambo within the chat thread, but you can have the result components show wherever you like by accessing the latest thread message's `renderedComponent` field:

```tsx
const { thread } = useTambo();
const latestComponent =
  thread?.messages[thread.messages.length - 1]?.renderedComponent;

return (
  <div>
    {latestComponent && (
      <div className="my-custom-wrapper">{latestComponent}</div>
    )}
  </div>
);
```

For more detailed documentation, visit [Tambo's official docs](https://docs.tambo.co).
